

3:41 PM 8/21/2024

BMC Module 2.4: Currency Risk


Counterparty Risk



	Translation vs Transaction Risk:
		Translation risk: incurred when converting statements from foreign currency to reported currency
		Transaction risk: incurred when conducting a transaction in a foreign currency			


	Settlement risk and replacement cost risk are two types of counterparty risk 
		Settlement Risk : risk of no payment
			famous example: Herstatt bank [Bankhaus Herstatt in Cologne, bankrupt on 26 June 1974 with multiple incomplete FX transactions]
			this type of settlement risk is now sometimes called Herstatt risk

			mitigated by CLS [Continously Linked Settlement] regulated by US Fed, removes principal settlement risk,
				uses a real-time gross settlement [RTGS] system
				
				this is NOT the same as a central clearing counterparty, which occurs in some other asset classes
				CLS is a third-party in the settlement process, but is not a counterparty in the original FX trade
	
		Replacement cost risk
			If the original trade does not go through, and the original counterparty is replaced by a new counterparty,
				then there may be a cost incurred because the exchange rate with the new counterparty will be different

			Mitigated by credit assessment/monitoring for each FX counterparty
			
			The longer the maturity of an FX contract [forward or option], the greater the credit risk
				This means longer-dated contracts will incur an additional credit charge, usually embedded in the price when originally traded


	
	There is counterparty risk in other asset classes, and in all types of financial derivatives.	




----------


Market Risk

	Speculators vs Hedgers
		Speculators seek to profit from currency fluctuations.
		Hedgers seek to minimize risk incurred from FX.

	Types of speculators:
		- Investors in assets denominated in a foreign currency
		- Corporations facing currency risk on either their import/expoirt or asset value in another currency
			e.g. US company with UK subsidiary
		- Individuals buying goods/services in another currency (e.g. travelers)





Risk appetite categories:
	Maximum exposure
		unlimited in profit and loss
	Minimum exposure
		for example: you can eliminate currency risk completely using forward outrights. pay a premium but eliminate all FX exposure
		[TODO: review how the outrights work]
		Bloomberg: ?
	Variable exposure
		options!





Forward outrights can be used to eliminate known future currency risks. 
	What if, instead, the risk is uncertain?
	Option contracts can be used to hedge against currency risks in this case.

	Call option: contract giving the right to buy underlying asset
	Put option: contract giving the right to sell underlying asset

		EUR CURNCY -> Select Euro United States Dollar Spot -> Select OVML:
			Simple vanilla EUR call / USD put option
			Note the forward points, interest rates in each currency, and implied volatility [Vol]
			Volatility is the key pricing factor for option




Three Types of Currency Forecasting Methods:
	
		1. Fundamental [macroeconomic]
			inflation
			relative interest rates [the "cost of carry"]
			economic growth
			employment
			budget surpluses/deficits
			current account surpluses/deficits
	
		2. Quantitative
			significant diversity of methods
		
			commonality: secrecy of specific methodology
			commonality: significant back-testing
				both for historical performance and risk/return relationships
	
		
		3. Technical [sentiment]
			emphasis on momentum and prevailing sentiment among traders




Bloomberg commands:
	ECTR
	OVML
	FXFA
	BI CURRG
	NI CEN
	GP
	FXC
	WCRS MAC
	ECST
	FXTF
	FXFC
	DES
	FXIP
	FRD


---------------


In the short term, currency values are driven by economic surprises. 

Most central banks target a certain inflation rate (e.g. 2% target in the US and other developed economies).

